BRITISH EAST AFRICA AND ZANZIBAR. UGANDA.

On the 3rd of September, 1888, a charter was issued incorporating this Company for the "entire management of those parts of the islands and mainland of the Zanzibar dominions on the East Coast of Africa appertaining to the territory lying between Wanga and Kipini, both inclusive, which are recognised in the Anglo-German Treaty of 1886 as reserved for the exclusive exercise of British influence, together with any further rights of a similar nature in East Africa or elsewhere which the Company may hereafter acquire." The Company thus formed had for its president Sir William Mackinnon, to whom the concession was originally granted on the 24th of May, 1887, by the Sultan of Zanzibar. The concession was a strip of coast 150 miles in length, including the important harbours of Mombassa and Kilifi, the former probably the finest harbour on the East Coast of Africa, and stretching inward to the ten-mile limit to which the Zanzibar dominion on the mainland was confined by the Anglo-German agreement referred to. The Company, however, had full powers for acquiring territory to the west of this limit as far as the zone of British influence extends, from the coast to the confines of the Congo Free State. Including the sphere of influence, the area, to which the operations of the Company potentially extended was estimated at 750,000 sq. miles. The whole of the remaining territory of the Sultan of Zanzibar was, by an arrangement concluded in 1890, placed under British protection, and that part of it north of Kipini was conceded to the Company 31st August, 1889, and 4th March, 1890.

On the 1st of July, 1895, the Company's territory was transferred to Her Majesty's Government, and is now administered under the Foreign Office through the Consul-General at Zanzibar.

Zanzibar.

The Kingdom of Zanzibar was formerly a dependency of Muscat, and became independent in 1861. The island itself, situated in 6° N. lat., is the largest coralline island on the African coast, being 47 miles long by 20 broad, and contains an area of 640 square miles. The port of the island is one of the best of Africa, and it has long been the centre of all commerce with the mainland, now included in the British and German spheres of influence. It has an excellent water supply, and some fine buildings. The climate is better than that of the mainland, the thermometer ranging from 77° to 90° with a mean of 80°, and an annual rainfall of 60 inches. The hot season is from January to March.

On the death of the late Sultan, in August, 1896, the palace was seized by Said Khaled, a member of his family, and force had to be resorted to to compel his submission. The palace was bombarded by British warships, and Khaled took refuge in the German consulate. The present Sultan was then installed.

The island is fertile, producing cloves, chulteers, copra, and other tropical products, but its exports gathered from the mainland include wax, hides, rubber, ebony, orchilla weed, copal, and tortoiseshell. Its imports are calico and Manchester goods, hardware, cereals, and iron and brass wire for the interior trade. The population is about 250,000, of very mixed blood, with the exception of a small upper class of pure Arabs.

Six miles to the north of Zanzibar lies the small and densely wooded but waterless Island of Tumbatu, and some 30 miles further north lies the Island of Pemba, with an area of 380 miles. It is very fertile, producing cloves to the value of £120,000l. a year.

General Description.

The general character of the East African coast is deadly, but beyond the central half of the British line, from a little south of Mombassa to Malindi, the climate is reported to be much better. The atmosphere is reported to be dry and comparatively healthy. The sandstone undersoil is unfavourable to rank vegetation, but the rainfall appears not to be abundant, as ebony, teak, thorn, and other hard woods abound, and vast quantities of lupatic and fibre aloe flourish, but the ground is said to be covered with a short sweet pasturage. Recent official reports describe the coastal belt as possessing a high degree of fertility, but at present much neglected on account of the want of free labour and intelligent methods of cultivation. Before the region in the interior was depopulated by the Masai, it appears to have been filled with a pastoral population, and in the dense forest patches are still found with plantations of Indian corn, beans, and lentils, and flocks of oxen, sheep, and goats. There will be for some time great difficulty in developing the country owing to the want of labour. The warlike and thieving propensities of the Masai are being kept in check without much trouble. Indian traders from Zanzibar and the German East African Protectorate are already settling in the territory.

The Anglo-German Agreement of 1890 defined the respective spheres of influence, so as to assign to Great Britain all the territory between the present southern line of delimitation, along the parallel of 1° S. lat. from the Congo State to the East Coast of the Victoria Nyanza, and thence to the mouth of the River Umba, including Mfumbiro mountain, but excluding Kilimanjaro, to the northern limit of the parallel of 6° N. lat., and the River Juba from its intersection with that parallel. Westward the British sphere extends to the Congo Free State, and to the north of that it is undefined, but includes the western watershed of the Nile. The coastline now under control of the Company reaches from Wanga to Kismayu, a distance of about 400 miles.

The inland regions have been explored as far as Uganda, which is now a British Protectorate and administered by an Imperial Commissioner, Mr. E. J. Berkeley. The very important country of Usoga, north of Victoria Nyanza, has been acquired. Two steamers maintain inter-coastal trade and mail communications; a stern-wheel steamer has been reconstructed at Mombassa for the navigation of the Tana river, and has succeeded in navigating that river to a point 300 miles from its mouth, and another steamer is built for launching on Victoria Nyanza. The stern-wheel steamer has also navigated the Juba to Bardera, a distance of about 400 miles. Mombassa and Malindi are now connected by telegraph, which has been extended to Witu and Lamu, via the Tana river at Golbanti, and Mombassa is in telegraphic communication with India and Europe. A railway from the coast has been commenced to Uganda, of which 100 miles were completed in Sept., 1897, and a road suitable for wheeled traffic has been constructed into the interior for a distance of 200 miles.

Camels have been introduced, but they do not thrive; donkeys, mules, and ponies do well.
The ports of Mombassa and Kilifi have been surveyed, and piers are being built at both places.

Chief Local Officer.
Agent and Consul-Gen. in Zanzibar and Commissioner in East Africa Protectorate, Sir A. H. Hardinge, K.C.M.G., C.B.

