ZANZIBAR.

Situation and Area.

The island of Zanzibar is situated in 6° S. latitude and is separated from the mainland by a channel 22½ miles across at its narrowest part. It is the largest Caroline island on the African coast, being 48 miles long by 15 broad, and having an area of 640 square miles. To the north east at a distance of some thirty miles lies the island of Pemba, in 5° S. latitude. It is smaller than Zanzibar, being 40 miles long by 10 broad, and having an area of 380 square miles.

Climate.

The annual rainfall amounts approximately in Zanzibar to 58 inches and in Pemba to 83 inches. The rainy seasons are well defined: the heavy rains occur in April previous to the setting in of the south-west monsoon, the light rains in November and December before the recurrence of the north-east monsoon. The thermometer ranges from 77° to 90° with a minimum of 80°. The climatic conditions though trying in the hot season which lasts from November to March are not necessarily unfavourable to Europeans provided that periods of residence are limited to terms of from twenty to thirty months.

People.

The Arabs were the conquerors and are the principal landowners of the islands. The conditions of life in a malarious and tropical country have deprived them of much of the vigorous temperament which distinguished their ancestors and the stoppage of the supply of slaves has left many of them almost without any resources. Nevertheless, though shaken by the ordeal through which they have passed, they still possess most of the land, and carry on the clove growing industry for which the two islands are famous. They understand the natives, and the natives understand them and accept their control more readily than that of any other race, except Europeans.

The bulk of the Zanzibar population consists of representatives of all the tribes of East Africa, intermingled with an Asiatic element. The name
given to this mixed population is Swahili, a term formerly used to note the coast tribes from Somaliland to Mozambique, "sahil" in Arabic meaning coast.

The descendants of the early settlers of the island of Zanzibar are called Wahadimu and live on the eastern portion of the island and especially on the east coast. They are the principal cattle breeders of the island. An Mhadimu is literally a servant, a term bestowed by the northern tribes when they conquered the country.

The natives of Pemba are known as Wapemba; they do not live in such seclusion as the Wahadimu on the larger island, but intermingle more freely with the Arabs and Swahili.

Khojas, Bohoras, Hindoos, Parsees, Goanese possess most of the trade of Zanzibar either as merchants, shopkeepers, money-lenders, small traders or skilled mechanics. Goanese keep the European stores and provide both cooks and dhobis. They and the Parsees are also employed largely as clerks.

There is a considerable contingent of natives of German East Africa and of the Comoro islands who have settled in Zanzibar and with the north-east monsoon arrive numbers of Somalis, Shihiri Arabs and Baluchis in dhows laden with the products of their countries. These people usually return with the south-west monsoon, but a few remain and settle permanently.

History.

The early history of Zanzibar is chiefly a record of petty feuds and complicated quarrels. The so-called "Zanj Empire" was already declining when the Portuguese began the conquest of the East African littoral towards the close of fifteenth century. It was during the sixteenth century that the Arabs of the East Coast sought the assistance of the Imams of Muscat to drive out the Portuguese, and the capture of Mombasa Fort in 1698 may be said to mark the downfall of Portuguese power north of Mozambique. On the ruins of the Portuguese power in the seventeenth century arose that of the Imams of Muscat. The allegiance to Muscat, however, was of a more or less nominal character until Seyyid Said, after having subdued his enemies on the mainland, transferred his capital to Zanzibar in 1832. On his death in 1856 a dispute as to the succession arising between his sons Seyyid Thwain of Muscat and Seyyid Majid of Zanzibar the African possessions were made independent and confirmed under Majid by an arbitration (dated 1861) of Lord Canning, then Governor-General of India.

Seyyid Said laid the foundations of Zanzibar's importance by making the island his permanent residence and by encouraging the cultivation of cloves. Under his direction Zanzibar soon became both politically and commercially the principal native city in East Africa. "If you play on the flute at Zanzibar," says an Arab proverb of the period, "all Africa as far as the lakes dances." Said's son Majid was succeeded in 1870 by Barghash, the first of his race to be commonly known as Sultan of Zanzibar.

In the year 1890 the supremacy of British interests in the islands themselves was recognized by France and Germany, and they were declared a British Protectorate in accordance with conventions by which Great Britain waived all claims to Madagascar in favour of France and ceded Heligoland to Germany. In the same year the mainland possessions which extended over the coast of East Africa, from Warsheikh in 3° N. latitude to Tunghli Bay in 10°42' S. latitude were ceded to Italy, Great Britain and Germany respectively, Great Britain and Italy paying rent for the territories under their protection, while Germany acquired the Sultan's rights by the payment of a sum of 200,000L. At a later date Italy also acquired these rights by payment of a sum of 144,000L.

In 1891 a regular government was constituted with a British representative as first minister. On the death of the Sultan in 1896 the palace was seized by a member of his family, Seyyid Khaled, and to compel the latter's submission the palace was bombarded by British warships. In 1906, the Imperial Government assumed more direct control over the Protectorate and reorganized the Government. In 1911 Seyyid Ali abdicated the throne and was succeeded by the present ruler, Seyyid Khalifa bin Harub. On 1st July, 1913, the control of the Protectorate was transferred from the Foreign Office to the Colonial Office, legal effect being given to the change of administration in the following year.

Industries and Trade.

The clove industry is by far the most important in the Protectorate, the Islands of Zanzibar and Pemba yielding the bulk of the world's supply. The clove was first introduced into Zanzibar from Reunion in 1818, and Sir Richard Burton remarks that as early as 1835 it had "almost supplanted the vulgar valuable coconut and the homely rice necessary for local consumption." He advised the Arabs of Zanzibar to follow the example of Mauritius and to give up cloves in favour of sugar. Colonel Rigby wrote in 1860:—"Were the prosperity of the Zanzibar Dominions dependent upon these degenerated Arabs it might well be despaired of," and complained of their lack of initiative in refusing to cultivate anything else. In spite of advice, however, and notwithstanding disasters—the hurricane of 1872, which devastated the main island, cutting off every clove and coconut tree, and the smallpox epidemic of 1898, which decimated the population—the Arabs clung to their cloves, and, by thus concentrating on one product, "surpassing all plants in value," to quote Lord Acton, have given Zanzibar a position on the world's market which she would probably never have attained had her energies been dissipated over a large variety. It is estimated that there are in both Islands about 60,000 acres under cloves and about 5½ million trees in bearing. The output varies considerably, the trees yielding heavy crops every three to five years: the average output of recent years has been about 14 million lbs. The large plantations are chiefly owned by Arabs, but many natives possess small holdings.

The coconut industry ranks next in importance after cloves, the conditions in both Islands being favourable to the growth of the tree and its nut-bearing properties. It is estimated that there are about 45,000 acres under cultivation and 24 million trees in both Islands. The export of copra, which is steadily increasing, amounted in 1915 to 10,286 tons. Much is produced by the small grower or trader, neither of whom possesses proper drying facilities, with the result that the quality of the product compares unfavourably with that of Cochin and Ceylon.
