TRISTAN DA CUNHA.

Tristan da Cunha and Gough Island are the principal of a group of islands lying in lat. 37° 6' S. long., 12° 2' W. It was taken possession of by a military force during the residence of Napoleon at St. Helena. Upon his death the garrison was withdrawn, with the exception of three men, who, with certain shipwrecked sailors, became the founders of the present settlement. For a long time only one of the settlers had a wife, but subsequently the others contracted with a sea captain to bring them wives from St. Helena. The population, when the island was visited in November, 1901, by one of H.M. ships, was found to be only 74 (18 families). It remains practically stationary, as the younger and more ambitious settlers migrate in batches to the Cape. The inhabitants practically enjoy their possessions in common, and there is no strong drink on the island, and no crime. It was at one time proposed to give them laws and a regular government, but this was found unnecessary for the above reasons, and they remain under the moral rule of their oldest inhabitant.

The inhabitants are spoken of as long-lived, healthy, moral, religious, and hospitable to strangers. A supply of stores and provisions was provided out of a grant voted by Parliament, and sent out by a man-of-war in 1886, nearly all the able-bodied men having been drowned while attempting to board a vessel in December, 1885.

In the way of live stock, the inhabitants have between them about 500 head of cattle, about 600 sheep, about 50 pigs, and an abundance of poultry. Potatoes do well, and a good crop is got annually. Apple trees and peach trees are in fair number and bear well; there are also a few fig trees, but they do not fruit. The tree of the island, which apparently is a juniper, and upon which the islanders are dependent for their wood for fuel, is getting scarce in the neighbourhood of settlement, but is abundant further off, and there is no fear of supply failing. Communication with passing vessels had, in 1901, become rather more frequent of late; in twelve months about eight vessels were communicated with. The islanders have in all five boats—the whaler supplied by Government in 1887, and four small canvas whale boats made by themselves. The proverbial good health of the islanders continues; and any such thing as real sickness remains unknown.

January, February, or March are the best months for visiting the island. It is in these months that weather at times becomes so settled that the islanders are able to make visits to Inaccessible and Nightingale Islands, which are some 20 and 25 miles off.

MISCELLANEOUS ISLANDS.

A number of islands and rocks throughout the world are British territory, or under British protection, but are not included in any Colony or separate Protectorate. Many of these have no permanent inhabitants, but are, or have been, leased by the Lords Commissioners of the Treasury for guano collection, or for cocoanut planting. The rents are paid into the Exchequer. Among such may be mentioned the Ashmore Group (Indian Ocean), Bird Island and Cato Island (in the Norfolk Island Group), Sombrero (West Indies, with a Board of Trade Lighthouse costing £20 annually), Raine Island, Bell Cay...
and Bramble Cay (near British New Guinea), Sydney Island, Phoenix Group (4° 25' S. lat., 171° 13' W. long.), the Caroline and Flint Islands (Pacific Ocean, 9° 56' S. lat., 150° 6' W. long., and 11° 26' S. lat., and 151° 48' W. long.), Malden Island, (4° 1' S. lat., 155° 57' W. long.), leased to Messrs. Grice, Sumner, and Co., Starbuck Island, Vortoc, Nightingale and Inaccessible Islands (in the S. Atlantic), and there are many others.

Humphrey (Manahiki), and Rierson (Rakahanga) Islands, lying to the north of the Cook Islands, about 160° W. long. and 10° S. lat., were annexed in 1889. Christmas, Fanning, and Penrhyn Islands were annexed in March, 1888, in view of the possibility of their being utilised in connection with the projected telegraph cable from Vancouver to Australasia. Christmas Island (1° 57' N. lat., 157° 27' W. long.) is an atoll 90 miles in circumference, barren, with only brackish water. A trading firm collects mother of pearl shells. Fanning Island (3° 51' N. lat., 158° 22' W. long.) is a small atoll 9 miles by 4, covered with cocoanut trees, copra and guano being exported. This is a station of the Pacific cable. Penrhyn Island (9° S. lat., 158° 3' W. long.) is an atoll 30 miles in circumference, partly covered with cocoanut trees, and having a population of 300. Mother of pearl is exported. Suwarrow Island (13° 13' S. lat., 163° 9' W. long.) was annexed for a similar reason, 22nd April, 1888; a protectorate was established over Jarvis Island, the Phoenix group, comprising Phoenix, Birnie, Hull, Gardner and Sydney Islands, Washington or New York Island, and Palmyra Island and Johnson Island.* Palmerston, Penrhyn, Suwarrow, Humphrey, Rierson, and one or two other small islands were in 1901 annexed to New Zealand with the Cook Islands.

The Great and Little Bases and Minicoy are small islets in the Indian Ocean, with lighthouses maintained by the Board of Trade out of shipping dues levied on vessels passing, and collected at Ceylon, Mauritius, Straits, and Indian ports.

The Kuriyan-Muriyan Islands, five in number, off the south-east coast of Arabia, were ceded by the Imam of Muskat for the purpose of landing the Red Sea telegraph cable. On one of them, Hallaniyah, is the signalling station maintained by the Telegraph Company. The whole group is leased for the purpose of guano collection.

Ambrym Cay and Sprattley Island (lat. 8° 38' N., 111° 54' E. long.; lat. 7° 52' N., 112° 55' E. long.), two uninhabited sandbanks in the middle of the China Sea, lying about 240 miles N.W. of Borneo and 100 miles N. of Labuan, were annexed in 1877, and leased for guano collection. They are annually visited by Chinese junks for the purpose of collecting turtle.

* Afterwards withdrawn and acknowledged to belong to Hawaii, on condition that the right to land a cable is conceded if desired.
